---
id: article_layers
title: Data Layers
sidebar_label: Data Layers
---

Data is moving and transforming in a single direction. From the physical disk until it meets the user's screen.
Breaking down the data flow into layers with an agreement up front on a set of rules and responsibilities may help us manage our code more easily.


**“Complexity is the enemy of execution”. Tony Robbins**

To make our application more resilient is to make it more simple to pay by simply handling fewer responsibilities. 
Simply means less complexity in our code.

The best way to solve this is by delegating responsibilities into different categories.
  

### Layer Rules

To make sure that the responsibilities of each layer are done only by the designated layer. 
We will decide upfront on some rules :

> When writing any type of `data-layer` try to put on the hat of one that will pay your data-layer APIs.  

1. The Datalayer will get data internally only from layers beside or below it.    
2. Each layer will be agnostic and will handle errors/create custom exceptions/logging/etc.. internally to make our layers independent and portable.
3. Keep code/classes/variable/constants where they need to be (WEB container code only in the web layer, DB queries in the DataAccess etc....)   

## Data Layer
<table><tr>
        <td><b>Input</b></td>
        <td>Data Sources/Configuration</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Expose</b></td>
        <td>ORM Entities, Clients, etc..</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Responsibilities</b></td>
        <td>Define connectors, clients, Map data, Migration, ORM entities, local/remote files, etc..</td>
</tr></table>


## Data-Access Layer

<table><tr>
        <td><b>Input</b></td>
        <td>Data Layer</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Expose</b></td>
        <td>Data as API calls that will be used by the layer above it.</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Responsibilities</b></td>
        <td>
            1. Describe Internal API  
        </td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Data Optimization</td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>3. Caching</td>
</tr></table>


Data-Access layers are the way we access the data of our application. thus, layers are the single source of truth for data fetching.

Here we will optimize queries, cache data, work with multiple data sources and more.  
This layer's single responsibility is to fetch data from the previous layer and expose them as APIs of the application.

* Using native queries/ORM is less important for the data flow as long that we keep layer rule number 1.

## Service Layer

<table><tr>
        <td><b>Input</b></td>
        <td>Data-Access/Services Layer</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Expose</b></td>
        <td>Data after business logic.</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Responsibilities</b></td>
        <td>
            1. Describe Public  
        </td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Bossiness Logic</td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>3. Expose a single data type</td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Caching</td>
</tr></table>

## Application layer

<table><tr>
        <td><b>Input</b></td>
        <td>Services Layer</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Expose</b></td>
        <td>Single interface of our library.</td>
    </tr><tr>
        <td><b>Responsibilities</b></td>
        <td>
            1. Describe Public  
        </td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Bossiness Logic</td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>3. Expose a single data type</td>
    </tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Caching</td>
</tr></table>


Here we will have custom implementation for each interface (web/mobile/pager/etc..).  
And this layer we will handle our users and session.

## Web layer
Receive: Data using the Application Layer  
Expose: REST API

Each layer act as an interface to the layer below it.


